---
title: "Open Sesame"
weight: 0
---

# Open Sesame

Welcome to the Open Sesame DIY escape room site. Here you will find
advice, tips, and ideas to create an escape room in your very own home.


## What is an Escape Room?

An escape room is an interactive game where a group of players work
together to solve a sequence of puzzles to "escape" their current
environment or complete some other themed objective. The players are
"trapped[^trapped]" in a room with a theme and given a dire scenario that
they must solve (e.g. "You are trapped in a dungeon facing eminent
execution," or "Deadly aliens have boarded your spaceship and are coming to
eat your heads.")

What makes an escape room unique is that the puzzles to be solved are
integrated into the physical room(s) the players are in. Locks click open,
containers offer new objects to manipulate, and doors open to new spaces to
explore. All these supply an immediacy and importance to the puzzles being
solved.


## Commercial vs. DIY Escape Rooms

There are thousands of establishments throughout the world providing escape
room games. If you live in an urban area, chances are there is an escape
room near you. For a fee, you and a group of friends can be immersed in an
escape room of themed construction for a truly immersive environment. The
room's design and puzzles can be especially intricate. Considering it can be
used around 8 times a day for many years, extra expense can be used to
custom build the room.

In contrast, a DIY escape room is a makeshift escape room in your home (or
other conveniently available space). Your improvised escape room won't have
the customized set of a commercial escape room (unless you really like set
construction), but with a bit of imagination, you can replicate the same
experience in your own home.


## Why DIY Escape Rooms?

Given the abundance commercial escape rooms, why go through the trouble of
making your own? There are several reasons, actually.

#### Customize for the players

Although commercial escape rooms come in many themes and difficulty levels,
they are ultimately designed for a general audience. In contrast, when
creating a DIY escape room at home, you will probably know exactly who the
players will be. This allows you to customize the game for them.

Making an escape room for a children's birthday party? Simplify the puzzles
and throw in some fun activities. Making an escape room for a group of
friends that have done many before? Expand on the puzzles you all already
know and add an added level of complexity. Do the players share a common
interest or knowledge (such as a particular movie or TV series)? Build a
room and puzzles around that.

#### Cost

A commercial escape room will run well over $100 USD for a 1 hour group
activity, which makes it not cheap. In contrast, a DIY escape room can
potentially be constructed from materials around the house.

I won't promise that a DIY escape room is free (even discounting the
personal time it will take to prepare the room). You will probably need to
purchase some [locks] to get started. And I do find myself spending some
money each time buying parts for physical puzzle items. But ultimately,
your budget is controlled by you, so you can spend as little or as much as
you like.

#### Play with any group size

To maximize their profit, a commercial escape room tries to maximize the
amount of people playing at one time. This is typically done by imposing
minimum group sizes or combining strangers from independent groups
together.

So with a commercial escape room you are likely to participate with a party
of 8-10 people. Unfortunately, with a group that large some people are
inevitably going to miss out on much of the puzzle solving.

With a DIY escape room, there is no real incentive to bundle large groups.
The DIY escape room works just as well, if not better, for a small group of
friends. In fact, groups can be broken up based on skill level, so that
less advanced players have more chance to participate.

#### No time limits

A commercial escape room is booked several times throughout the day. That
means that there is a finite time players can use the escape room before it
has to be cleared out and reset for the next reservation. Consequently,
players are given a time limit (usually 1 hour) to solve all the puzzles.
If the players need more time, then they _fail_ and are kicked out, which
makes for a much less satisfying experience.

A DIY escape room has no such limitation. Players can be given enough time
(and hints) as necessary to complete all the puzzles. Regardless of skill
level or luck, the players can always be given the satisfaction of
completing everything.

#### You can always make more

Even if you have the money to regularly go to escape rooms, you will still
be limited by the escape rooms available. Escape rooms have low
replayability, and new escape rooms are slow to be built. Eventually, you
will run out of escape rooms to try in your area. DIY escape rooms are
limited only by your imagination.

#### Trapped at home

I originally got started with DIY escape rooms during the global COVID-19
pandemic. During this time, many communities such as my own were under
mandated lockdown, and all commercial escape rooms were closed. But a DIY
escape room does not require you to leave your house. So, it is a great
activity for those times when you are forced together.



[^trapped]: Although escape rooms frequently feature a scenario where
    players are trapped in a space, _never_ actually physically restrain or
    lock players in a room. All participants should be capable of
    evacuating in case of emergency.

[locks]: equipment/locks
